# Oncovipet

***The impact of the first wave of COVID-19 pandemic on cancer staging by FDG PET/CT: the Italian experience of a tertiary referral Center***

Acronim: ONCOVIPET study (oncology under COVID with PET)

## Background

The COVID-19 pandemic is having a strong impact on healthcare systems, economy, work, education and social relationships. Particularly, the COVID-19 emergency has direct and indirect effects on the healthcare delivery process in National Health Services (NHSs). The direct effects include the radical reorganization of the NHSs, on the one hand to respond to the acute needs of people infected with the virus and on the other to contain the infection to protect the most vulnerable categories and healthcare personnel. The indirect effects of the pandemic are represented by the impact on people with acute and non-acute conditions not related to COVID-19. On March 2020, the Italian NHS suddenly redesigned its services to increase the capacity for treating patients with COVID-19. Procedures included discharging thousands to free up beds, postponing planned treatment, shifting appointments online whenever possible and redeploying healthcare staff. In addition, on March 8, 2020, the Italian Government declared a national lockdown in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.  “Stay‐at‐home” orders were enacted to slow the spread of SARS‐CoV‐2, the virus that causes COVID‐19, and reduce the burden on the NHS. 
All over the world, there is growing concern on the indirect effects of the pandemic on non-COVID patients. In Italy, from March to December 2020, national surveillance data found that about 33 million Italians underwent a postponement or cancellation of visits, exams or operations scheduled for 2020 (74% one or more postponements and 34% the cancellation, respectively). The cancellations or postponements of medical visits involved all specialties with an average delay of 2 months. In addition, approximately 69% of Italians chose to give up booking or carrying out visits, specialist examinations or invasive procedures. The reasons are mainly the fear of contracting SARS-CoV-2 by going to a health facility (71%), the very long waiting times (20%) or the economic reasons that have arisen due to pandemics and lockdown.
In oncology, the indirect effects of the COVID-19 pandemic are a source of concern and analysis [1-5]. It is well known that the best outcomes in oncology are obtained in those tumours whose diagnosis is at an early stage and treatment is started straight away. Unfortunately, several diagnostic and treatment pathways used for cancer patient management have been severely affected, especially during the “first wave” of the COVID-19 pandemic [6-9]. The first phase of the emergency determined a reduction in inpatient and outpatient services provided to non-COVID patients as the delay or suspension of important screening programs, the limitation of some diagnostic tests such as computed tomography (CT) to the emergency context and the delay of specialist visits and some elective procedures such as biopsies or surgery [10-14]. For instance, approximately a third of Italian cancer centres reported a contraction of their activities of 10–30% compared to 2019. About 36% of patients reported postponement or cancellation of clinical exams and visits. In addition, the fear of COVID-19 transmission has contributed to a lower propensity of patients to directly refer to hospitals. Therefore, many patients are likely to experience a delay in both diagnosis and treatment of cancer.
A recently published systematic review and meta-analysis reported that patients who are postponed cancer treatment, even for a month, may in many cases have an increased relative risk of death, 6% to 13% higher than the risk of those receiving treatment in the optimal timing [15]. In addition, this risk continues to increase as the delay in care increases. In Italy, no direct population-based evidence of the impact of COVID-19 on cancer staging is still available.

Positron Emission Tomography/CT with 2-deoxy-2-[fluorine-18]fluoro- D-glucose (FDG PET/CT) has become one of the cornerstones of patient management in oncology. The high diagnostic accuracy of staging FDG PET/CT for detecting lymph node and distant metastasis and the impact on patient management have been widely reported in several malignancies (i.e. lymphoma, melanoma, breast, lung and colo-rectal cancer as well as gynaecological malignancies)[16-28].
Considering that the incidence of cancer has not changed in the last years, that the planning of staging PET scans as well as the number of PET scans performed at our Center has not changed in 2020 compared to 2019, while delays in the initial diagnosis of cancer and first medical evaluation are possible as previously described, we will compare the extent of disease on staging FDG PET/CT scans performed in the months following the first national lockdown with the same period of the previous year.


## Aim

The present study aims to evaluate whether the 3 months of the first national lockdown had an impact on the extent of disease in cancer patients using as a surrogate measure the whole body FDG PET/CT performed for staging purposes. 

## Research implications

There is an urgent need for studies identifying the consequences of the pandemic on non-COVID patients, for example in the oncology field. Any delay in cancer diagnosis and treatment initiation increases the stage progression of cancer patients and mortality in the future. This study indirectly analyses the impact of the first national lockdown on the initiation of care in cancer patients. Cases diagnosed with delay will show up in their advanced stage along with unknown effects on mortality and health care costs.

## References

1.	Patt D, Gordan L, Diaz M, Okon T, Grady L, Harmison M, Markward N, Sullivan M, Peng J, Zhou A: Impact of COVID-19 on Cancer Care: How the Pandemic Is Delaying Cancer Diagnosis and Treatment for American Seniors. JCO Clin Cancer Inform 2020, 4:1059-1071.
2.	de Jonge L, Worthington J, van Wifferen F, Iragorri N, Peterse EFP, Lew JB, Greuter MJE, Smith HA, Feletto E, Yong JHE et al: Impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on faecal immunochemical test-based colorectal cancer screening programmes in Australia, Canada, and the Netherlands: a comparative modelling study. Lancet Gastroenterol Hepatol 2021.
3.	Oderda M, Calleris G, Falcone M, Fasolis G, Muto G, Oderda G, Porpiglia F, Volpe A, Bertetto O, Gontero P: How uro-oncology has been affected by COVID-19 emergency? Data from Piedmont/Valle d'Aosta Oncological Network, Italy. Urologia 2021, 88(1):3-8.
4.	Fabi A, Pugliese P, Falbo PT, Corsi D, Fabbri MA, Vincenzi B, Bria E, Angelini F, Bonucci A, Pellegrino A et al: The Experience of Oncology Healthcare Providers in the Central Italy during the COVID-19 Lockdown. Cancers (Basel) 2020, 12(10).
5.	Quaquarini E, Saltalamacchia G, Presti D, Caldana G, Tibollo V, Malovini A, Palumbo R, Teragni CM, Balletti E, Mollica L et al: Impact of COVID-19 Outbreak on Cancer Patient Care and Treatment: Data from an Outpatient Oncology Clinic in Lombardy (Italy). Cancers (Basel) 2020, 12(10).
6.	Di Bidino R, Cicchetti A: Impact of SARS-CoV-2 on Provided Healthcare. Evidence From the Emergency Phase in Italy. Front Public Health 2020, 8:583583.
7.	Torzilli G, Viganò L, Galvanin J, Castoro C, Quagliuolo V, Spinelli A, Zerbi A, Donadon M, Montorsi M, group C-S-I: A Snapshot of Elective Oncological Surgery in Italy During COVID-19 Emergency: Pearls, Pitfalls, and Perspectives. Ann Surg 2020, 272(2):e112-e117.
8.	Albano D, Bruno A, Bruno F, Calandri M, Caruso D, Clemente A, Coppolino P, Cozzi D, De Robertis R, Gentili F et al: Impact of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) emergency on Italian radiologists: a national survey. Eur Radiol 2020, 30(12):6635-6644.
9.	Onesti CE, Tagliamento M, Curigliano G, Harbeck N, Bartsch R, Wildiers H, Tjan-Heijnen V, Martin M, Rottey S, Generali D et al: Expected Medium- and Long-Term Impact of the COVID-19 Outbreak in Oncology. JCO Glob Oncol 2021, 7:162-172.
10.	Jereczek-Fossa BA, Pepa M, Marvaso G, Bruni A, Buglione di Monale E Bastia M, Catalano G, Filippi AR, Franco P, Gambacorta MA, Genovesi D et al: COVID-19 outbreak and cancer radiotherapy disruption in Italy: Survey endorsed by the Italian Association of Radiotherapy and Clinical Oncology (AIRO). Radiother Oncol 2020, 149:89-93.
11.	Oldani C, Vanni G, Buonomo OC: COVID-19 Unintended Effects on Breast Cancer in Italy After the Great Lockdown. Front Public Health 2020, 8:601748.
12.	Fortunato L, d'Amati G, Taffurelli M, Tinterri C, Marotti L, Cataliotti L: Severe Impact of Covid-19 Pandemic on Breast Cancer Care in Italy: A Senonetwork National Survey. Clin Breast Cancer 2020.
13.	Rebecchi F, Arolfo S, Ugliono E, Morino M, Asti E, Bonavina L, Borghi F, Coratti A, Cossu A, De Manzoni G et al: Impact of COVID-19 outbreak on esophageal cancer surgery in Northern Italy: lessons learned from a multicentric snapshot. Dis Esophagus 2020.
14.	Lambertini M, Toss A, Passaro A, Criscitiello C, Cremolini C, Cardone C, Loupakis F, Viscardi G, Meattini I, Dieci MV et al: Cancer care during the spread of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) in Italy: young oncologists' perspective. ESMO Open 2020, 5(2).
15.	Hanna TP, King WD, Thibodeau S, Jalink M, Paulin GA, Harvey-Jones E, O'Sullivan DE, Booth CM, Sullivan R, Aggarwal A: Mortality due to cancer treatment delay: systematic review and meta-analysis. BMJ 2020, 371:m4087.
16.	Boellaard R, Delgado-Bolton R, Oyen WJ, Giammarile F, Tatsch K, Eschner W, Verzijlbergen FJ, Barrington SF, Pike LC, Weber WA et al: FDG PET/CT: EANM procedure guidelines for tumour imaging: version 2.0. Eur J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 2015, 42(2):328-354.
17.	Kostakoglu L, Agress H, Goldsmith SJ: Clinical role of FDG PET in evaluation of cancer patients. Radiographics 2003, 23(2):315-340; quiz 533.
18.	Kandathil A, Kay FU, Butt YM, Wachsmann JW, Subramaniam RM: Role of FDG PET/CT in the Eighth Edition of TNM Staging of Non-Small Cell Lung Cancer. Radiographics 2018, 38(7):2134-2149.
19.	Wartski M, Sauvanet A: 18F-FDG PET/CT in pancreatic adenocarcinoma: A role at initial imaging staging? Diagn Interv Imaging 2019, 100(12):735-741.
20.	Paydary K, Seraj SM, Zadeh MZ, Emamzadehfard S, Shamchi SP, Gholami S, Werner TJ, Alavi A: The Evolving Role of FDG-PET/CT in the Diagnosis, Staging, and Treatment of Breast Cancer. Mol Imaging Biol 2019, 21(1):1-10.
21.	Ha HK, Koo PJ, Kim SJ: Diagnostic Accuracy of F-18 FDG PET/CT for Preoperative Lymph Node Staging in Newly Diagnosed Bladder Cancer Patients: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis. Oncology 2018, 95(1):31-38.
22.	Caresia Aroztegui AP, García Vicente AM, Alvarez Ruiz S, Delgado Bolton RC, Orcajo Rincon J, Garcia Garzon JR, de Arcocha Torres M, Garcia-Velloso MJ, Imaging OTFotSSoNMaM: 18F-FDG PET/CT in breast cancer: Evidence-based recommendations in initial staging. Tumour Biol 2017, 39(10):1010428317728285.
23.	Thanarajasingam G, Bennani-Baiti N, Thompson CA: PET-CT in Staging, Response Evaluation, and Surveillance of Lymphoma. Curr Treat Options Oncol 2016, 17(5):24.
24.	Perng P, Marcus C, Subramaniam RM: (18)F-FDG PET/CT and Melanoma: Staging, Immune Modulation and Mutation-Targeted Therapy Assessment, and Prognosis. AJR Am J Roentgenol 2015, 205(2):259-270.
25.	Jones M, Hruby G, Solomon M, Rutherford N, Martin J: The Role of FDG-PET in the Initial Staging and Response Assessment of Anal Cancer: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis. Ann Surg Oncol 2015, 22(11):3574-3581.
26.	Kaneko Y, Murray WK, Link E, Hicks RJ, Duong C: Improving patient selection for 18F-FDG PET scanning in the staging of gastric cancer. J Nucl Med 2015, 56(4):523-529.
27.	Mak D, Corry J, Lau E, Rischin D, Hicks RJ: Role of FDG-PET/CT in staging and follow-up of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma. Q J Nucl Med Mol Imaging 2011, 55(5):487-499.
28.	Yousefi-Koma A, Panah-Moghaddam M, Kalff V: The Utility of Metabolic Imaging by 18F-FDG PET/CT in Lung Cancer: Impact on Diagnosis and Staging. Tanaffos 2013, 12(1):16-25.
29.	Amin MB, Edge, S., Greene, F., Byrd, D.R., Brookland, R.K., Washington, M.K., Gershenwald, J.E., Compton, C.C., Hess, K.R., Sullivan, D.C., Jessup, J.M., Brierley, J.D., Gaspar, L.E., Schilsky, R.L., Balch, C.M., Winchester, D.P., Asare, E.A., Madera, M., Gress, D.M., Meyer, L.R. (Eds.) (ed.): AJCC Cancer Staging Manual 2017.
